what is vascular lesions ?
Vascular lesions are relatively common abnormalities of the skin and underlying tissues, more commonly known as birthmarks. There are three major categories of vascular lesions: Hemangiomas, Vascular Malformations, and Pyogenic Granulomas. While these birthmarks can look similar at times, they each vary in terms of origin and necessary treatment.
At SSM Health Cardinal Glennon Children’s hospital, the SLUCare Physician Group pediatric plastic surgery team is committed to creating an individualized care plan for vascular lesions that improves the physical and emotional well-being of your child.


Hemangiomas
Hemangiomas are the most common type of vascular lesion in children They are benign, or noncancerous, tumors of the cells that line blood vessels. They usually appear at or shortly after birth as faint areas of pinkish-red discoloration of the skin and then quickly undergo a period of rapid growth.
During this time, the lesions enlarge in size and thickness, darken in color and can have problems with ulceration (breakdown of the overlying skin), bleeding and/or infection. The appearance of a hemangioma will vary based on the depth of involvement of the lesion. Superficial hemangiomas appear a bright red color and frequently grow outward on top of the skin surface whereas deeper lesions look more like a bruise on the skin with a soft tissue mass beneath it.

The growth phase lasts from 6-12 months, after which, the hemangioma goes through a period of stabilization and then slow involution (shrinkage) that usually takes many years before it's complete. After involution, the lesions are smaller and faded in color, but may have some residual skin or fatty tissue remaining. In addition, previous ulceration can leave permanent scarring of the skin.

Hemangiomas involving the eyelid can cause permanent loss of eyesight if they grow to block an infant’s vision. Similarly, lesions that obstruct the ear canal can interfere with hearing and speech development. Because of this, lesions in these critical areas will be treated more aggressively.

Ulcerated lesions (often around the mouth, perianal or genital areas) may benefit from early laser treatment to stabilize the surface, promote healing, and help minimize bleeding. Finally, patients with multiple hemangiomas or extensive lesions around the neck and face may have associated internal lesions of the airway or vital organs that put them at risk for life threatening complications, and should be referred to an experienced practitioner for further diagnosis and care.

Many hemangiomas can be monitored by your the pediatrician or dermatologist as they grow naturally without the need for treatment. However, extensive lesions or lesions with ulceration, bleeding or super-infection should be seen by a specialist. Those occurring in cosmetically or functionally sensitive areas (such as the nose tip or lip) should also be seen by a doctor experienced in the management of hemangiomas, as well as a pediatric plastic surgeon.


Treatment of Hemangiomas
The treatment of hemangiomas depends on their characteristic life-cycle and location and can be categorized into medical and surgical therapies. Your child’s plan will be customized depending on their specific lesion and its behavior.

Medication: Patients may be placed on medications such as oral corticosteroids like prednisone or an oral blood pressure medication called propranolol, in order to help slow the rapid growth phase and promote involution. These medications can be effective, but have some side effects that make careful patient selection and monitoring important. Bulky hemangiomas may sometimes benefit from an injection of a corticosteroid into the lesion, which is usually done under a brief anesthetic. Other medications (such as interferon given by serial injection) can have more serious potential side effects, and are reserved for patients with extensive lesions that do not respond to other therapies.

Surgery: The surgical treatment of hemangiomas must carefully balance the need for early treatment with the scarring that will be created by the procedure. Because most lesions undergo at least a fair amount of involution on their own, it is important to delay most surgery until this occurs to allow tissue to stabilize before reconstruction. This will maximize healing and minimize the length of scars. An exception to waiting may occur if surgery provides the quickest option to relieve obstruction or allows better staging of reconstruction the lesion(s). These situations are best determined by an experienced pediatric plastic surgeon.

Laser Therapy: Finally, laser therapy can be used to treat ulcerated lesions, as well as any residual blood vessels or discoloration that may remain after involution. Extensive airway lesions may also require CO2 laser therapy for management, which is carried out by an otolaryngologist (ENT surgeon) under anesthesia.

Hemangiomas are fairly common infantile vascular birthmarks whose noticeable appearance and growth cycle can cause significant distress for the family of affected children.  Our pediatric plastic surgeons will customize a treatment plan for your child’s distinct lesion, working with other experienced practitioners to achieve the best long-term aesthetic outcome and a happy, healthy child.